The rule "annovar_on_mutect" likely involves running the ANNOVAR tool on the output generated by the MuTect variant calling tool.
- ANNOVAR is a popular software used for annotating genetic variants with various functional and genomic annotations. 
- MuTect, on the other hand, is a specific variant caller designed for detecting somatic mutations in tumor-normal paired samples.

The purpose of this rule is to annotate the variants called by MuTect using ANNOVAR, thereby providing additional functional and genomic information about the detected variants.
- input files :

```
 vcf = "Mutect2_TvN/{tsample}_Vs_{nsample}_twicefiltered_TvN.vcf.gz"
```
- output file :
-> avinput: input file for ANNOVAR, which contains the variants from MuTect2 in a specific format expected by ANNOVAR. It is a preprocessed version of the VCF file that is suitable for annotation.
-> txt:It contains detailed annotations for each variant, including gene annotations, functional effects, conservation scores, population frequencies, and other relevant information. The "mm9_multianno" indicates that the annotations are based on the mm9 genome build.
-> vcf: It contains the same annotations as the txt file but in the VCF file structure, which is widely used for storing variant data. The "mm9_multianno" indicates that the annotations are based on the mm9 genome build.

 ```
         avinput = "annovar_mutect2_TvN/{tsample}_Vs_{nsample}.avinput",
        txt = "annovar_mutect2_TvN/{tsample}_Vs_{nsample}.mm9_multianno.txt",
        vcf = "annovar_mutect2_TvN/{tsample}_Vs_{nsample}.mm9_multianno.vcf"

 ```
- genome reference :
 The genome reference used in the "annovar_on_mutect" rule is indicated by the "mm9" annotation in the output file paths. The "mm9" refers to the Mouse Genome Build 9
 The mm9 assembly is a specific version of the mouse reference genome that was created by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
