### 1. Description of Msodepth Module

The Msodepth module is a tool or module used to calculate genome-wide sequencing coverage. Genome-wide sequencing coverage refers to the depth or extent of sequencing coverage across the entire genome.
The Msodepth module would analyze sequencing data and calculate coverage metrics for the entire genome. It would typically take input data in a format such as aligned sequencing reads (BAM/SAM files) or variant call files (VCF) and determine the number of reads or variants overlapping each genomic position.
The calculated coverage information can be used to assess the quality and completeness of the sequencing data. It provides insights into regions of the genome that may have higher or lower coverage, helping identify areas with potential gaps or biases in the sequencing data. Genome-wide coverage is crucial in various genomics applications, including variant calling, structural variant detection, copy number analysis, and identification of regions of interest.

### 2. Description of Interfaces and Dependencies

- Specifications of Input Files

The Msodepth module would typically require aligned sequencing reads in BAM (Binary Alignment/Map) or SAM (Sequence Alignment/Map) format. These files contain the sequencing reads that have been aligned to a reference genome. The aligned reads represent the data from which the coverage will be calculated.
```
        bam = "bam/{sample}.nodup.recal.bam" if config["remove_duplicates"] == True else "bam/{sample}.recal.bam",
        bai = "bam/{sample}.nodup.recal.bam.bai" if config["remove_duplicates"] == True else "bam/{sample}.recal.bam.bai"
```
- Ouput Files 

The main output of the "mosdepth" module is one or more coverage depth files. These files contain information about the sequencing coverage at each position in the reference genome. The coverage depth is usually represented as the number of aligned reads or fragments that align to a particular genomic position.
the file will have the extension ".txt" and will contain the global distribution information generated by "mosdepth". The global distribution typically refers to the distribution of coverage depths across the entire genome or specified genomic regions.

```
        "mapping_QC/mosdepth/{sample}.mosdepth.global.dist.txt"
```
- Genome Reference
The file path suggests that the Mosdepth tool is installed within a Conda environment named "pipeline_GATK_2.1.4_V2". 
```
    "mosdepth": {
        "app": "~/.conda/envs/pipeline_GATK_2.1.4_V2/bin/mosdepth"
```
the "mosdepth" module does not directly specify the genome reference within its configuration.
- Packages and Versions

### 3. Issues and TODO
