description of the rule annovar_on_mutect_tumor_only :

The rule "annovar_on_mutect_tumor_only" likely refers to a specific workflow or analysis pipeline that involves using both ANNOVAR and MuTect tools for variant annotation and variant calling, respectively, on tumor-only sequencing data.

ANNOVAR is a popular software tool used for the annotation of genetic variants identified in sequencing data. It provides information about the functional consequences, population frequency, and other relevant annotations for genetic variants.
MuTect is a widely used variant caller specifically designed for the analysis of tumor sequencing data.

The "annovar_on_mutect_tumor_only" rule likely combines the functionalities of ANNOVAR and MuTect to annotate and analyze genetic variants in tumor-only sequencing data. This rule may involve several steps, such as pre-processing the raw sequencing data, aligning the reads to a reference genome, variant calling using MuTect, and then annotating the identified variants using ANNOVAR. The resulting annotated variants can provide valuable insights into the potential functional impacts and biological significance of the identified genetic alterations in the tumor sample.

- input files :

The VCF file generated by MuTect2 contains the called variants (genetic alterations) identified in the tumor sample based on the analysis of the tumor-only sequencing data. 
```
        vcf = "Mutect2_T/{tsample}_tumor_only_twicefiltered_T.vcf.gz"
```
- output files 
avinput: The output file path indicates the location and name pattern of the ANNOVAR input file. ANNOVAR requires a specific input format, and this file is generated to contain the necessary information from the MuTect2 VCF file for annotation. The {tsample} placeholder allows for the generation of a unique file path and name for each tumor sample.

txt: The output file path indicates the location and name pattern of the ANNOVAR output file in a tab-separated values (TSV) format. This file contains the annotated variants and their corresponding functional annotations, population frequencies, and other relevant information. The {tsample} placeholder is used to generate a specific file path and name for each tumor sample.

vcf: The output file path indicates the location and name pattern of the ANNOVAR output file in the variant call format (VCF). This file contains the annotated variants in VCF format, including the original variant information along with additional annotations provided by ANNOVAR. The {tsample} placeholder is used to generate a unique file path and name for each tumor sample.
```
        avinput = "annovar_mutect2_T/{tsample}.avinput",
        txt = "annovar_mutect2_T/{tsample}.mm9_multianno.txt",
        vcf = "annovar_mutect2_T/{tsample}.mm9_multianno.vcf"
```
- 
